Well, lords, the duke of Lancaster is dead.
And living, too, for now his son is duke.
Barely in title, not in revenues.
Richly in both, if justice had her right.
My heart is great, but it must break with silence,
ere't be disburdened with a liberal tongue.
Nay, speak thy mind,
and let him ne'er speak more
that speaks thy words again to do thee harm.
Tends that thou wouldst speak to the duke of Hereford?
If it be so, out with it boldly, man.
Quick is mine ear to hear of good towards him.
No good at all that I can do for him,
unless you call it good to pity him,
bereft and gelded of his patrimony.
Now, afore God,
'tis shame such wrongs are borne in him,
a royal prince,
and many moe of noble blood in this declining land.
The king is not himself, but basely led by flatterers.
And what they will inform,
merely in hate against any of us all,
that will the king severely prosecute 'gainst us,
our lives, our children, and our heirs.
The commons hath he pilled with grievous taxes
and quite lost their hearts.
The nobles hath he fined for ancient quarrels
And daily new exactions are devised
as blanks, benevolences, and I wot not what.
But what, o' God's name, doth become of this?
Wars have not wasted it, for warred he hath not,
but basely yielded upon compromise
that which his noble ancestors achieved with blows.
More hath he spent in peace than they in wars.
The earl of Wiltshire hath the realm in farm.
The king's grown bankrupt, like a broken man.
Reproach and dissolution hangeth over him.
He hath not money for these Irish wars,
his burdenous taxations notwithstanding,
but by the robbing of the banished duke--
His noble kinsman.
Oh, most degenerate king.
But, lords, we hear this fearful tempest sing,
yet seek no shelter to avoid the storm.
We see the wind sit sore upon our sails,
and yet we strike not, but securely perish.
We see the very wreck that we must suffer,
and unavoided is the danger now
for suffering so the causes of our wreck.
Not so.
Even through the hollow eyes of death I spy life peering,
but I dare not say how near the tidings of our comfort is.
Nay, let us share thy thoughts,
as thou dost ours.
Be confident to speak, Northumberland.
We three are but thyself.
And, speaking so,
thy words are but as thoughts.
Therefore, be bold.
Then thus.
I have from Le Port Blanc, a bay in Brittany,
received intelligence that Harry, duke of Hereford;
Rainold Lord Cobham,
that late broke from the duke of Exeter;
his brother, archbishop late of Canterbury;
Sir Thomas Erpingham; Sir John Ramston;
Sir John Norbery; Sir Robert Waterton; and Francis Quoint--
all these well furnished by the duke of Britain
with eight tall ships,
3,000 men of war--
are making hither with all due expedience
and shortly mean to touch our northern shore.
Perhaps they had ere this,
but that they stay
the first departing of the king for Ireland.
If then we shall shake off our slavish yoke,
imp out our drooping country's broken wing,
redeem from broking pawn the blemished crown,
wipe off the dust that hides our scepter's gilt,
and make high majesty look like itself,
away with me in post to Ravenspurgh.
But if you faint, as fearing to do so,
stay and be secret, and myself will go.
To horse; to horse.
Urge doubts to them that fear.
Hold out my horse, and I will first be there.
I know not what to do.
I would to God, so my untruth had not provoked him to it,
the king had cut off my head with my brother's.
Uncle--
What, are there no posts dispatched for Ireland?
How shall we do for money for these wars?
Come, Sister--
Cousin, I would say--
pray, pardon me.
Go, fellow.
Get thee home.
Provide some carts and bring away the armor that is there.
Gentlemen, will you go muster men?
If I know how or which way to order these affairs
thus disorderly thrust into my hands,
never believe me.
Both are my kinsmen.
The one is my sovereign,
whom both my oath and duty bids defend.
The other again is my kinsman, whom the king hath wronged,
whom conscience and my kindred bids to right.
Well, somewhat we must do.
Come, cousin; I'll dispose of you.
Gentlemen, will you go muster up your men
and meet me presently at Berkeley?
The wind sits fair for news to go to Ireland,
but none returns.
For us to levy power proportionable to the enemy
is all unpossible.
Besides, our nearness to the king in love
is near the hate of those love not the king.
And that is the wavering commons,
for their love lies in their purses,
and whoso empties them by so much
fills their hearts with deadly hate.
Wherein the king stands generally condemned.
If judgment lie in them, then so do we,
because we ever have been near the king.
Well, I will for refuge straight to Bristol Castle.
The earl of Wiltshire is already there.
Thither will I with you,
for little office will the hateful commons perform for us,
except like curs to tear us all to pieces.
Will you go along with us?
No.
I will to Ireland to His Majesty.
Farewell.
If heart's presages be not vain,
we three here part that ne'er shall meet again.
That's as York thrives to beat back Bolingbroke.
Alas, poor duke.
The task he undertakes
is numbering sands and drinking oceans dry.
Where one on his side fights, thousands will fly.
Farewell at once, for once, for all, forever.
Well, we may meet again.
I fear me, never.
How far is it, my lord, to Berkeley now?
Believe me, noble lord,
I am a stranger here in Gloucestershire.
These high, wild hills and rough, uneven ways
draws out our miles and makes them wearisome.
And yet your fair discourse hath been as sugar,
making the hard way sweet and delectable.
But I bethink me what a weary way
from Ravenspurgh to Cotswold will be found
in Ross and Willoughby, wanting your company,
which, I protest, hath very much beguiled
the tediousness and process of my travel.
But theirs is sweetened by the hope to have
the present benefit which I possess.
And hope to joy
is little less in joy than hope enjoyed.
By this the weary lords shall make their way seem short,
as mine hath done by sight of what I have,
your noble company.
Of much less value is my company than your good words.
But who comes here?
It is my son, young Harry Percy,
sent from my brother, Worcester, whencesoever.
Harry.
How fares your uncle?
I had thought, my lord, to have learned his health of you.
Why, is he not with the queen?
No, my good lord.
He hath forsook the court, broken his staff of office,
and dispersed the household of the king.
What was his reason?
He was not so resolved when last we spake together.
Because your lordship was proclaimed traitor.
But he, my lord, is gone to Ravenspurgh
to offer service to the duke of Hereford,
and sent me over by Berkeley
to discover what power the duke of York had levied there,
then with directions to repair to Ravenspurgh.
Have you forgot the duke of Hereford, boy?
No, my good lord, for that is not forgot
which ne'er I did remember.
To my knowledge,
I never in my life did look on him.
Then learn to know him now.
This is the duke.
My gracious lord,
I tender you my service,
such as it is, being tender, raw, and young,
which elder days shall ripen and confirm
to more approved service and desert.
I thank thee, gentle Percy,
and be sure I count myself in nothing else so happy
as in a soul remembering my good friends.
And, as my fortune ripens with thy love,
it shall be still thy true love's recompense.
My heart this covenant makes.
My hand thus seals it.
How far is it to Berkeley,
and what stir keeps good old York there with his men of war?
There stands the castle by yon tuft of trees,
manned with 300 men, as I have heard.
And in it are the lords of York, Berkeley, and Seymour.
None else of name and noble estimate.
Here come the lords of Ross and Willoughby,
bloody with spurring and fiery red with haste.
Welcome, my lords.
I wot your love pursues a banished traitor.
All my treasury is yet but unfelt thanks,
which more enriched
shall be your love and labor's recompense.
Your presence makes us rich, most noble lord--
And far surmounts our labor to attain it.
Evermore thanks, the exchequer of the poor,
which, till my infant fortune comes to years,
stands for my bounty.
But who comes here?
It is my lord of Berkeley, as I guess.
My lord of Hereford, my message is to you.
My lord, my answer is to Lancaster,
and I am come to seek that name in England.
And I must find that title in your tongue
before I make reply to aught you say.
Mistake me not, my lord.
'Tis not my meaning to raze one title of your honor out.
To you, my lord, I come, what lord you will,
from the most gracious regent of this land,
the duke of York, to know what pricks you on
to take advantage of the absent time
and fright our native peace with self-born arms.
I shall not need transport my words by you.
Here comes His Grace in person.
My noble uncle.
Show me thy humble heart and not thy knee,
whose duty is deceivable and false.
My gracious uncle--
Tut, tut.
Grace me no grace, nor uncle me no uncle.
I am no traitor's uncle,
and that word "grace" in an ungracious mouth is but profane.
Why have those banished and forbidden legs
dared once to touch a dust of England's ground?
But then more "why."
Why have they dared to march
so many miles upon her peaceful bosom,
frighting her pale faced villages with war
and ostentation of despised arms?
Comest thou because the anointed king is hence?
Why, foolish boy, the king is left behind,
and in my loyal bosom lies his power.
Were I but now the lord of such hot youth
as when brave Gaunt, thy father, and myself
rescued the Black Prince, that young Mars of men,
from forth the ranks of many thousand French.
Oh, then how quickly would this arm of mine,
now prisoner to the palsy, chastise thee
and minister correction to thy fault.
My gracious uncle, let me know my fault.
On what condition stands it and wherein?
Even in condition of the worst degree,
in gross rebellion and detested treason.
Thou art a banished man
and here art come before the expiration of thy time
in braving arms against thy sovereign.
As I was banished, I was banished Hereford.
But as I come, I come for Lancaster.
And, noble Uncle, I beseech Your Grace.
Look on my wrongs with an indifferent eye.
You are my father,
for methinks in you I see old Gaunt alive.
Oh, then, my father, will you permit
that I shall stand condemned a wandering vagabond,
my rights and royalties plucked from my arms perforce
and given away to upstart unthrifts?
Wherefore was I born?
If that my cousin king be king in England,
it must be granted I am duke of Lancaster.
You have a son, Aumerle, my noble cousin.
Had you first died, and he been thus trod down,
he should have found his uncle Gaunt a father
to rouse his wrongs and chase them to the bay.
I am denied to sue my livery here,
and yet my letters patents give me leave.
My father's goods are all distrained and sold,
and these and all are all amiss employed.
What would you have me do?
I am a subject, and I challenge law.
Attorneys are denied me,
and therefore, personally I lay my claim
to my inheritance of free descent.
The noble duke hath been too much abused.
It stands Your Grace upon to do him right.
Base men by his endowments are made great.
My lords of England, let me tell you this.
I have had feeling of my cousin's wrongs
and labored all I could to do him right.
But in this kind to come, in braving arms,
be his own carver and cut out his way
to find out right with wrong, it may not be.
And you who do abet him in this kind
cherish rebellion and are rebels all.
The noble duke hath sworn his coming is but for his own.
And for the right of that,
we all have strongly sworn to give him aid
and let him never see joy that breaks that oath.
Well, well.
I see the issue of these arms.
I cannot mend it, I must needs confess,
because my power is weak and all ill left.
But if I could,
by Him that gave me life,
I would attach you all and make you stoop
unto the sovereign mercy of the king.
But since I cannot, be it known to you I do remain as neuter.
And so farewell...
unless you please to enter in the castle
and there repose you for this night.
An offer, Uncle, that we will accept.
But we must win Your Grace to go with us to Bristol Castle,
which they say is held by Bushy, Bagot, and their complices,
the caterpillars of the commonwealth,
which I have sworn to weed and pluck away.
It may be that I will go with you.
No, but yet I'll pause,
for I am loath to break our country's laws.
Nor friends nor foes, to me welcome you are.
Things past redress are now with me past care.
My lord of Salisbury, we have stayed ten days
and hardly kept our countrymen together,
and yet we hear no tidings from the king.
Therefore we will disperse ourselves.
Farewell.
Stay yet another day, thou trusty Welshman.
The king reposeth all his confidence in thee.
'Tis thought the king is dead.
We will not stay.
The bay trees in our country are all withered
and meteors fright the fixed stars of heaven.
The pale faced moon looks bloody on the earth,
and lean looked prophets whisper fearful change.
Rich men look sad and ruffians dance and leap,
the one in fear to lose what they enjoy,
the other to enjoy by rage and war.
These signs forerun the death or fall of kings.
Farewell.
Our countrymen have gone and fled,
as well assured Richard, their king, is dead.
Bushy and Green, I will not vex your souls--
since presently your souls must part your bodies--
with too much urging your pernicious lives,
for it were no charity.
Yet to wash your blood from off my hands,
here in the view of men
I will unfold some causes of your deaths.
You have misled a prince, a royal king,
a happy gentleman in blood and lineaments,
by you unhappied and disfigured clean.
You have in manner with your sinful hours
made a divorce betwixt his queen and him,
broke the possession of a royal bed,
and stained the beauty of a fair queen's cheeks
with tears drawn from her eyes by your foul wrongs.
Myself, a prince by fortune of my birth,
near to the king in blood--
and near in love till you did make him misinterpret me--
have stooped my neck under your injuries
and sighed my English breath in foreign clouds,
eating the bitter bread of banishment,
whilst you have fed upon my signories,
disparked my parks and felled my forest woods,
from my own windows torn my household coat,
razed out my imprese, leaving me no sign,
save men's opinions and my living blood,
to show the world I am a gentleman.
This and much more, much more than twice all this,
condemns you to the death.
See them delivered over to execution and the hand of death.
More welcome is the stroke of death to me
than Bolingbroke to England.
Lords, farewell.
My comfort is that heaven will take our souls
and plague injustice with the pains of hell.
My Lord Northumberland, see them dispatched.
Uncle,
you say the queen is at your house.
For God's sake, fairly let her be entreated.
Tell her I send to her my kind commends.
Take special care my greetings be delivered.
A gentleman of mine I have dispatched
with letters of your love to her at large.
Thanks, gentle Uncle.
Come, lords; away.
To fight with Glendower and his complices:
awhile to work, and after, holiday.